It was a wrong number that started it, the telephone ringing three times in the dead of night, and the voice on the other end asking for someone he was not.
Much later, when he was able to think about the things that happened to him, he would conclude that nothing was real except chance.
But that was much later.
In the beginning, there was simply the event and its consequences.
Whether it might have turned out differently, or whether it was all predetermined with the first word that came from the stranger's mouth, is not the question.
The question is the story itself, and whether or not it means something is not for the story to tell.
As for Quinn, there is little that need detain us.
Who he was, where he came from, and what he did are of no great importance.
We know, for example, that he was thirty-five years old.
We know that he had once been married, had once been a father, and that both his wife and son were now dead.
We also know that he wrote books.
To be precise, we know that he wrote mystery novels.
These works were written under the name of William Wilson, and he produced them at the rate of about one a year, which brought in enough money for him to live modestly in a small New York apartment.
Because he spent no more than five or six months on a novel, for the rest of the year he was free to do as he wished.
He read many books, he looked at paintings, he went to the movies.
In the summer he watched baseball on television; in the winter he went to the opera.
More than anything, however, what he liked to do was walk.
Nearly every day, rain or shine, hot or cold, he would leave his apartment to walk through the city – never really going anywhere, but simply going wherever his legs happened to take him.
New York was an inexhaustible space, a labyrinth of endless steps, and no matter how far he walked, no matter how well he came to know its neighborhoods and streets, it always left him with the feeling of being lost.
Lost, not only in the city, but within himself as well.
Each time he took a walk, he felt as though he were leaving himself behind, and by giving himself up to the movement of the streets, by reducing himself to a seeing eye, he was able to escape the obligation to think, and this, more than anything else, brought him a measure of peace, a salutatory emptiness within.
The world was outside of him, around him, before him, and the speed with which it kept changing made it impossible for him to dwell on any one thing for very long.
Motion was of the essence, the act of putting one foot in front of the other and allowing himself to follow the drift of his own body.
By wandering aimlessly, all places became equal, and it no longer mattered where he was.
On his best walks, he was able to feel that he was nowhere.
New York was the nowhere he had built around himself, and he realized that he had no intention of ever leaving it again.
In the past, Quinn had been more ambitious.
As a young man, he had published several books of poetry, had written plays, critical essays, and had worked on a number of long translations.
But quite abruptly, he had given up all that.
A part of him had died, he told his friends, and he did not want it coming back to haunt him.
It was then that he had taken on the name of William Wilson.
Quinn was no longer that part of him that could write books, and although in many ways Quinn continued to exist, he no longer existed for anyone but himself.
The next morning, Quinn woke up earlier than he had in several weeks.
As he drank his coffee, buttered his toast, and read through the baseball scores in the paper (the Mets had lost again, two to one, on a ninth inning error), it did not occur to him that he was going to show up for his appointment.
Even that locution, 'his appointment', seemed odd to him.
It wasn't his appointment, it was Paul Auster's.
And who that person was he had no idea.
Nevertheless, as time wore on he found himself doing a good imitation of a man preparing to go out.
He cleared the table of the breakfast dishes, tossed the newspaper on the couch, went into the bathroom, showered, shaved, went on to the bedroom wrapped in two towels, opened the closet and picked out his clothes for the day.
He found himself tending toward a jacket and a tie.
Quinn had not worn a tie since the funerals of his wife and son, and he could not even remember if he still owned one.
But there it was, hanging amidst the debris of his wardrobe.
He dismissed a white shirt as too formal, however, and instead chose a gray and red check affair to go with the gray tie.
He put them on in a kind of trance.
It was not until he had his hand on the doorknob that he began to suspect what he was doing.
I seem to be going out, he said to himself.
But if I am going out, where exactly am I going?
An hour later, as he climbed from the number 4 bus at 70th Street and Fifth Avenue, he still had not answered the question.
To one side of him was the park, green in the morning sun, with sharp, fleeting shadows; to the other side was the Frick, white and austere, as if abandoned to the dead.
He thought for a moment of Vermeer's Soldier and Young Girl Smiling, trying to remember the expression on the girl's face, the exact position of her hands around the cup, the red back of the faceless man.
In his mind, he caught a glimpse of the blue map on the wall and the sunlight pouring through the window, so like the sunlight that surrounded him now.
He was walking.
He was crossing the street and moving eastward.
At Madison Avenue he turned right and went south for a block, then turned left and saw where he was.
I seem to have arrived, he said to himself.
He stood before the building and paused.
It suddenly did not seem to matter anymore.
He felt remarkably calm, as if everything had already happened to him.
As he opened the door that would lead him into the lobby, he gave himself one last word of advice.
If all this is really happening, he said, then I must keep my eyes open.
It was a woman who opened the apartment door.
For some reason, Quinn had not expected this, and it threw him off track.
Already, things were happening too fast.
Before he had a chance to absorb the woman's presence, to describe her to himself and form his impressions, she was talking to him, forcing him to respond.
Therefore, even in those first moments, he had lost ground, was starting to fall behind himself.
Later, when he had time to reflect on these events, he would manage to piece together his encounter with the woman.
But that was the work of memory, and remembered things, he knew, had a tendency to subvert the things remembered.
As a consequence, he could never be sure of any of it.
The woman was thirty, perhaps thirty-five; average height at best; hips a touch wide, or else voluptuous, depending on your point of view; dark hair, dark eyes, and a look in those eyes that was at once self-contained and vaguely seductive.
She wore a black dress and very red lipstick.
Mr Auster? A tentative smile; a questioning tilt to the head.
That's right, said Quinn.
I'm Virginia Stillman, the woman began.
Peter's wife.
He's been waiting for you since eight o'clock.
The appointment was for ten, said Quinn, glancing at his watch.
It was exactly ten.
He's been frantic, the woman explained.
I've never seen him like this before.
He just couldn't wait.
She opened the door for Quinn.
As he crossed the threshold and entered the apartment, he could feel himself going blank, as if his brain had suddenly shut off.
He had wanted to take in the details of what he was seeing, but the task was somehow beyond him at that moment.
The apartment loomed up around him as a kind of blur.
He realized that it was large, perhaps five or six rooms, and that it was richly furnished, with numerous art objects, silver ashtrays, and elaborately framed paintings on the walls.
But that was all.
No more than a general impression – even though he was there, looking at those things with his own eyes.
He found himself sitting on a sofa, alone in the living room.
He remembered now that Mrs. Stillman had told him to wait there while she went to find her husband.
He couldn't say how long it had been.
Surely no more than a minute or two.
But from the way the light was coming through the windows, it seemed to be almost noon.
It did not occur to him, however, to consult his watch.
The smell of Virginia Stillman's perfume hovered around him, and he began to imagine what she looked like without any clothes on.
Then he thought about what Max Work might have been thinking, had he been there.
He decided to light a cigarette.
He blew the smoke into the room.
It pleased him to watch it leave his mouth in gusts, disperse, and take on new definition as the light caught it.
He heard the sound of someone entering the room behind him.
Quinn stood up from the sofa and turned around, expecting to see Mrs. Stillman.
Instead, it was a young man, dressed entirely in white, with the white-blond hair of a child.
Uncannily, in that first moment, Quinn thought of his own dead son.
Then, just as suddenly as the thought had appeared, it vanished.
Peter Stillman walked into the room and sat down in a red velvet armchair opposite Quinn.
He said not a word as he made his way to his seat, nor did he acknowledge Quinn's presence.
The act of moving from one place to another seemed to require all his attention, as though not to think of what he was doing would reduce him to immobility.
Quinn had never seen anyone move in such a manner, and he realized at once that this was the same person he had spoken to on the phone.
The body acted almost exactly as the voice had: machine-like, fitful, alternating between slow and rapid gestures, rigid and yet expressive, as if the operation were out of control, not quite corresponding to the will that lay behind it.
It seemed to Quinn that Stillman's body had not been used for a long time and that all its functions had been relearned, so that motion had become a conscious process, each movement broken down into its component submovements, with the result that all flow and spontaneity had been lost.
It was like watching a marionette trying to walk without strings.
Everything about Peter Stillman was white.
White shirt, open at the neck; white pants, white shoes, white socks.
Against the pallor of his skin, the flaxen thinness of his hair, the effect was almost transparent, as though one could see through to the blue veins behind the skin of his face.
This blue was almost the same as his eyes: a milky blue that seemed to dissolve into a mixture of sky and clouds.
Quinn could not imagine himself addressing a word to this person.
It was as though Stillman's presence was a command to be silent.
Stillman settled slowly into his chair and at last turned his attention to Quinn.
As their eyes met, Quinn suddenly felt that Stillman had become invisible.
He could see him sitting in the chair across from him, but at the same time it felt as though he was not there.
It occurred to Quinn that perhaps Stillman was blind.
But no, that did not seem possible.
The man was looking at him, even studying him, and if recognition did not flicker across his face, it still held something more than a blank stare.
Quinn did not know what to do.
He sat there dumbly in his seat, looking back at Stillman.
A long time passed.
No questions, please, the young man said at last.
Yes. No. Thank you.
He paused for a moment.
I am Peter Stillman.
I say this of my free will. Yes.
That is not my real name. No.
Of course, my mind is not all it should be.
But nothing can be done about that. No. About that. No, no. Not anymore.
You sit here and think: who is this person talking to me?
What are these words coming from his mouth?
I will tell you.
Or else I will not tell you.
At the corner of 72nd Street and Madison Avenue, he waved down a cab.
As the car rattled through the park toward the West Side, Quinn looked out the window and wondered if these were the same trees that Peter Stillman saw when he walked out into the air and the light.
He wondered if Peter saw the same things as he did, or whether the world was a different place for him.
And if a tree was not a tree, he wondered what it really was.
After the cab had dropped him off in front of his house, Quinn realized that he was hungry.
He had not eaten since breakfast early that morning.
It was strange, he thought, how quickly time had passed in the Stillman apartment.
If his calculations were correct, he had been there for more than fourteen hours.
Within himself, however, it felt as though his stay had lasted three or four hours at most.
He shrugged at the discrepancy and said to himself, I must learn to look at my watch more often.
He retraced his path along 107th Street, turned left on Broadway, and began walking uptown, looking for a suitable place to eat.
A bar did not appeal to him tonight – eating in the dark, the press of boozy chatter – although normally he would have welcomed it.
As he crossed 112th Street, he saw that the Heights Luncheonette was still open and decided to go in.
It was a brightly lit yet dreary place, with a large rack of girlie magazines on one wall, an area for stationery supplies, another area for newspapers, several tables for patrons, and a long Formica counter with swivel stools.
A tall Puerto Rican man in a white cardboard chef's hat stood behind the counter.
It was his job to make the food, which consisted mainly of gristle-studded hamburger patties, bland sandwiches with pale tomatoes and wilted lettuce, milkshakes, egg creams, and buns.
To his right, ensconced behind the cash register, was the boss, a small balding man with curly hair and a concentration camp number tattoed on his forearm,
lording it over his domain of cigarettes, pipes, and cigars.
He sat there impassively, reading the night-owl edition of the next morning's Daily News.
The place was almost deserted at that hour.
He would arrive early, never later than seven o'clock and sit there with a take-out coffee, a buttered roll, and an open newspaper on his lap, watching the glass door of the hotel.
By eight o'clock Stillman would come out, always in his long brown overcoat, carrying a large, old-fashioned carpet bag.
For two weeks this routine did not vary. The old man would wander through the streets of the neighborhood, advancing slowly, sometimes by the merest of increments, pausing, moving on again, pausing once more, as though each step had to be weighed and measured before it could take its place among the sum total of steps.
Moving in this manner was difficult for Quinn.
He was used to walking briskly, and all this starting and stopping and shuffling began to be a strain, as though the rhythm of his body was being disrupted.
He was hare in pursuit of the tortoise, and again and again he had to remind himself to hold back.
What Stillman did on these walks remained something of a mystery to Quinn.
He could, of course, see with his own eyes what happened, and all these things he dutifully recorded in his red notebook. But the meaning of these things continued to elude him.
Stillman never seemed to be going anywhere in particular, nor did he seem to know where he was.
and yet, as if by conscious design, he kept to a narrowly circumscribed area, bounded on the north by Riverside Park, and on the east by Amsterdam Avenue.
No matter how haphazard his journeys seemed to be – and each day his itinerary was different – Stillman never crossed these borders.
Such precision baffled Quinn, for in all other respects Stillman seemed to be aimless.
As he walked, Stillman did not look up.
His eyes were permanently fixed on the pavement, as though he were searching for something.
Indeed, every now and then he would stoop down, pick some object off the ground, and examine it closely, turning it over and over in his hand.
It made Quinn think of an archeologist inspecting a shard at some prehistoric ruin.
Occasionally, after poring over an object in this way, Stillman would toss it back onto the sidewalk. But more often than not he would open his bag and lay the object gently inside it.
Then, reaching into one of his coat pockets, he would remove a red notebook – similar to Quinn's but smaller – and write in it with great concentration for a minute or two.
Having completed this operation, he would return the notebook to his pocket, pick up his bag, and continue on his way.
As far as Quinn could tell, the objects Stillman collected were valueless.
They seemed to be no more than broken things, discarded things, stray bits of junk.
Over the days that passed, Quinn noted a collapsible umbrella shorn of its material, the severed head of a rubber doll, a black glove, the bottom of a shattered light bulb, several pieces of printed matter (sogged magazines, shredded newspapers), a torn photograph, anonymous machinery parts, and sundry other clumps of flotsam he could not identify.
The fact that Stillman took this scavenging seriously intrigued Quinn, but he could do no more than observe, write down what he saw in the red notebook, hover stupidly on the surface of things.
At the same time, it pleased him to know that Stillman also had a red notebook, as if this formed a secret link between them.
Quinn suspected that Stillman's red notebook contained answers to the questions that had been accumulating in his mind, and he began to plot various stratagems for stealing it from the old man.
But the time had not yet come for such a step.
Other than picking up objects from the street, Stillman seemed to do nothing.
Every now and then he would stop somewhere for a meal.
Occasionally he would bump into someone and mumble an apology.
Once a car nearly ran him over as he was crossing the street.
Stillman did not talk to anyone, did not go into any stores, did not smile.
He seemed neither happy nor sad.
Twice, when his scavenging haul had been unusually large, he returned to the hotel in the middle of the day and remerged a few minutes later with an empty bag.
On most days he spent at least several hours in Riverside Park, walking methodically along the macadam footpaths or else thrashing through the bushes with a stick.
His quest for objects did not abate amidst the greenery.
Stones, leaves, and twigs all found their way into his bag.
Once, Quinn observed, he even stooped down for a dried dog turd, sniffed it carefully, and kept it.
It was in the park, too, that Stillman rested.
In the afternoon, often following his lunch, he would sit on a bench and gaze out across the Hudson.
Once, on a particularly warm day, Quinn saw him sprawled out on the grass asleep.
When darkness came, Stillman would eat dinner at the Apollo Coffee Shop on 97th Street and Broadway and then return to his hotel for the night.
Not once did he try to contact his son.
This was confirmed by Virginia Stillman, whom Quinn called each night after returning home.
The essential thing was to stay involved.
Little by little, Quinn began to feel cut off from his original intentions, and he wondered now if he had not embarked on a meaningless project.
It was possible, of course, that Stillman was merely biding his time, lulling the world into lethargy before striking.
But that would assume he was aware of being watched, and Quinn felt that was unlikely.
He had done his job well so far, keeping at a discreet distance from the old man, blending into the traffic of the street, neither calling attention to himself nor taking drastic measures to keep himself hidden.
On the other hand, it was possible that Stillman had known all along that he would be watched – had even known it in advance – and therefore had not taken the trouble to discover who the particular watcher was.
If being followed was a certainty, what did it matter?
A watcher, once discovered, could always be replaced by another.
This view of the situation comforted Quinn, and he decided to believe in it, even though he had no grounds for belief.
Either Stillman knew what he was doing or he didn't.
and if he didn't, then Quinn was going nowhere, was wasting his time.
How much better it was to believe that all his steps were actually to some purpose.
If this interpretation required knowledge on Stillman's part, then Quinn would accept this knowledge as an article of faith, at least for the time being.
There remained the problem of how to occupy his thoughts as he followed the old man.
Quinn was used to wandering.
His excursions through the city had taught him to understand the connectedness of inner and outer.
Using aimless motion as a technique of reversal, on his best days he could bring the outside in and thus usurp the sovereignty of inwardness.
By flooding himself with externals, by drowning himself out of himself, he had managed to exert some small degree of control over his fits of despair.
Wandering, therefore, was a kind of mindlessness.
But following Stillman was not wandering.
Stillman could wander, he could stagger like a blindman from one spot to another, but this was a privilege denied to Quinn.
For he was obliged now to concentrate on what he was doing, even if it was next to nothing.
Time and again his thoughts would begin to drift, and soon thereafter his steps would follow suit.
This meant that he was constantly in danger of quickening his pace and crashing into Stillman from behind.
To guard against this mishap he devised several different methods of deceleration.
The first was to tell himself that he was no longer Daniel Quinn.
He was Paul Auster now, and with each step he took he tried to fit more comfortably into the strictures of that transformation.
Auster was no more than a name to him, a husk without content.
To be Auster meant being a man with no interior, a man with no thoughts.
Stillman was gone now.
The old man had become part of the city.
He was a speck, a punctuation mark, a brick in an endless wall of bricks.
Quinn could walk through the streets every day for the rest of his life, and still he would not find him.
Everything had been reduced to chance, a nightmare of numbers and probabilities.
There were no clues, no leads, no moves to be made.
Quinn backtracked in his mind to the beginning of the case.
His job had been to protect Peter, not to follow Stillman.
That had simply been a method, a way of trying to predict what would happen.
By watching Stillman, the theory was that he would learn what his intentions were toward Peter.
He had followed the old man for two weeks.
What, then, could he conclude?
Not much.
Stillman's behavior had been too obscure to give any hints.
There were, of course, certain extreme measures that they could take.
He could suggest to Virginia Stillman that she get an unlisted telephone number.
That would eliminate the disturbing calls, at least temporarily.
If that failed, she and Peter could move.
They could leave the neighborhood, perhaps leave the city altogether.
At the very worst, they could take on new identities, live under different names.
This last thought reminded him of something important.
Until now, he realized, he had never seriously questioned the circumstances of his hiring.
Things had happened too quickly, and he had taken it for granted that he could fill in for Paul Auster.
Once he had taken the leap into that name, he had stopped thinking about Auster himself.
If this man was as good a detective as the Stillmans thought he was, perhaps he would be able to help with the case.
Quinn would make a clean breast of it, Auster would forgive him, and together they would work to save Peter Stillman.
He looked through the yellow pages for the Auster Detective Agency.
There was no listing.
In the white pages, however, he found the name.
There was one Paul Auster in Manhattan, living on Riverside Drive – not far from Quinn's own house.
There was no mention of a detective agency, but that did not necessarily mean anything.
It could be that Auster had so much work he didn't need to advertise.
Quinn picked up the phone and was about to dial when he thought better of it.
This was too important a conversation to leave to the phone.
He did not want to run the risk of being brushed off.
Since Auster did not have an office, that meant he worked at home.
Quinn would go there and talk to him face to face.
The rain had stopped now, and although the sky was still gray, far to the west Quinn could see a tiny shift of light seeping through the clouds.
As he walked up Riverside Drive, he became aware of the fact that he was no longer following Stillman.
It felt as though he had lost half of himself.
For two weeks he had been tied by an invisible thread to the old man.
Whatever Stillman had done, he had done; wherever Stillman had gone, he had gone.
His body was not accustomed to this new freedom, and for the first few blocks he walked at the old shuffling pace.
The spell was over, and yet his body did not know it.
Auster's building was in the middle of the long block that ran between 116th and 119th Streets, just south of Riverside Church and Grant's Tomb.
It was a well-kept place, with polished doorknobs and clean glass, and it had an air of bourgeois sobriety that appealed to Quinn at that moment.
Auster's apartment was on the eleventh floor, and Quinn rang the buzzer, expecting to hear a voice speak to him through the intercom.
But the door buzzer answered him without any conversation.
Quinn pushed the door open, walked through the lobby, and rode the elevator to the eleventh floor.
It was a man who opened the apartment door.
He was a tall dark fellow in his mid-thirties, with rumpled clothes and a two-day beard.
In his right hand, fixed between his thumb and first two fingers, he held an uncapped fountain pen, still poised in a writing position.
The man seemed surprised to find a stranger standing before him.
Yes? he asked tentatively.
Quinn spoke in the politest tone he could muster. Were you expecting someone else?
My wife, as a matter of fact.
That's why I rang the buzzer without asking who it was.
I'm sorry to disturb you, Quinn apologized. But I'm looking for Paul Auster.
I'm Paul Auster, said the man.
I wonder if I could talk to you. It's quite important.
You'll have to tell me what it's about first.
I hardly know myself. Quinn gave Auster an honest look.
It's complicated, I'm afraid. Very complicated.
Do you have a name?
I'm sorry. Of course I do. Quinn.
The name seemed to suggest something to Auster, and he paused for a moment abstractedly, as if searching through his memory.
Quinn, he muttered to himself.
I know that name from somewhere. He went silent again, straining harder to dredge up the answer.
You aren't a poet, are you?
I used to be, said Quinn.
But I haven't written poems for a long time now.
You did a book several years ago, didn't you?
I think the title was Unfinished Business.
A little book with a blue cover.
Yes. That was me.
I liked it very much.
I kept hoping to see more of your work.
In fact, I even wondered what had happened to you.
I'm still here. Sort of.
Auster opened the door wider and gestured for Quinn to enter the apartment.
It was a pleasant enough place inside; oddly shaped, with several long corridors, books cluttered everywhere, pictures on the walls by artists Quinn did not know, and a few children's toys scattered on the floor – a red truck, a brown bear, a green space monster.
Auster led him to the living room, gave him a frayed upholstered chair to sit in, and then went off to the kitchen to fetch some beer.
He returned with two bottles, placed them on a wooden crate that served as the coffee table, and sat down on the sofa across from Quinn.
Was it some kind of literary thing you wanted to talk about? Auster began.
No, said Quinn.
In the end, they are actually successful.
The book was just one of their ploys.
The idea was to hold a mirror up to Don Quixote's madness to record each of his absurd and ludicrous delusions, so that when he finally read the book himself, he would see the error of his ways.
I like that.
Yes. But there's one last twist.
Don Quixote, in my view, was not really mad.
He only pretended to be.
In fact, he orchestrated the whole thing himself.
Remember: throughout the book Don Quixote is preoccupied by the question of posterity.
Again and again he wonders how accurately his chronicler will record his adventures.
This implies knowledge on his part; he knows beforehand that this chronicler exists.
And who else is it but Sancho Panza, the faithful squire whom Don Quixote has chosen for exactly this purpose?
In the same way, he chose the three others to play the roles he destined for them.
It was Don Quixote who engineered the Benengali quartet.
And not only did he select the authors, it was probably he who translated the Arabic manuscript back into Spanish.
We shouldn't put it past him.
For a man so skilled in the art of disguise, darkening his skin and donning the clothes of a Moor could not have been very difficult.
I like to imagine that scene in the marketplace at Toledo.
Cervantes hiring Don Quixote to decipher the story of Don Quixote himself.
There's great beauty to it.
But you still haven't explained why a man like Don Quixote would disrupt his tranquil life to engage in such an elaborate hoax.
That's the most interesting part of all.
In my opinion, Don Quixote was conducting an experiment.
He wanted to test the gullibility of his fellow men.
Would it be possible, he wondered, to stand up before the world and with the utmost conviction spew out lies and nonsense?
To say that windmills were knights, that a barber's basin was a helmet, that puppets were real people?
Would it be possible to persuade others to agree with what he said, even though they did not believe him?
In other words, to what extent would people tolerate blasphemies if they gave them amusement?
The answer is obvious, isn't it?
To any extent.
For the proof is that we still read the book.
It remains highly amusing to us.
And that's finally all anyone wants out of a book – to be amused.
Auster leaned back on the sofa, smiled with a certain ironic pleaure, and lit a cigarette.
The man was obviously enjoying himself, but the precise nature of that pleasure eluded Quinn.
It seemed to be a kind of soundless laughter, a joke that stopped short of its punchline, a generalized mirth that had no object.
Quinn was about to say something in response to Auster's theory, but he was not given the chance.
Just as he opened his mouth to speak, he was interrupted by a clattering of keys at the front door, the sound of the door opening and then slamming shut, and a burst of voices.
Auster's face perked up at the sound.
He rose from his seat, excused himself to Quinn, and walked quickly towards the door.
Quinn heard laughter in the hallway, first from a woman and then from a child – the high and the higher, a staccato of ringing shrapnel – and then the basso rumbling of Auster's guffaw.
The child spoke: Daddy, look what I found!
And then the woman explained that it had been lying on the street, and why not, it seemed perfectly okay.
A moment later he heard the child running towards him down the hall. The child shot into the living room, caught sight of Quinn, and stopped dead in his tracks.
He was a blond-haired boy of five or six.
Good afternoon, said Quinn.
The boy, rapidly withdrawing into shyness, managed no more than a faint hello.
In his left hand he held a red object that Quinn could not identify.
Quinn asked the boy what it was.
It's a yoyo, he answered, opening his hand to show him.
I found it on the street.
Does it work?
The boy gave an exaggerated pantomine shrug.
Dunno.
Siri can't do it. And I don't know how.
Quinn asked him if he could try, and the boy walked over and put it in his hand.
As he examined the yoyo, he could hear the child breathing beside him, watching his every move.
The yoyo was plastic, similar to the ones he had played with years ago, but more elaborate somehow, an artifact of the space age.
Quinn fastened the loop at the end of the string around his middle finger, stood up, and gave it a try.
The yoyo gave off a fluted, whistling sound as it descended, and sparks shot off inside it.
The boy gasped, but then the yoyo stopped, dangling at the end of the line.
A great philosopher once said, muttered Quinn, that the way up and the way down are one and the same.
But you didn't make it go up, said the boy.
It only went down.
You have to keep trying.
Quinn was rewinding the spool for another attempt when Auster and his wife entered the room.
He looked up and saw the woman first.
In that one brief moment he knew that he was in trouble.
She was a tall, thin blonde, radiantly beautiful, with an energy and happiness that seemed to make everything around her invisible.
It was too much for Quinn.
He felt as though Auster were taunting him with the things he had lost, and he responded with envy and rage, a lacerating self-pity.
Yes, he too would have liked to have this wife and this child, to sit around all day spouting drivel about old books, to be surrounded by yoyos and ham omelettes and fountain pens.
He prayed to himself for deliverance.
Auster saw the yoyo in his hands and said, I see you've already met.
Daniel, he said to the boy, this is Daniel.
And then to Quinn, with that same ironic smile, Daniel, this is Daniel.
The boy burst out laughing and said, Everybody's Daniel!
That's right, said Quinn.
I'm you, and you're me.
And around and around it goes, shouted the boy, suddenly spreading his arms and spinning around the room like a gyroscope.
And this, said Auster, turning to the woman, is my wife, Siri.
The wife smiled her smile, said she was glad to meet Quinn as though she meant it, and then extended her hand to him.
He shook it, feeling the uncanny slenderness of her bones, and asked if her name was Norwegian.
Not many people know that, she said.
Do you come from Norway?
Indirectly, she said. By way of Northfield, Minnesota.
And then she laughed her laugh, and Quinn felt a little more of himself collapse.
Quinn was nowhere now.
He had nothing, he knew nothing, he knew that he knew nothing.
Not only had he been sent back to the beginning, he was now before the beginning, and so far before the beginning that it was worse than any end he could imagine.
His watch read nearly six.
Quinn walked home the way he had come, lengthening his strides with each new block.
By the time he came to his street, he was running.
It's June second, he told himself.
Try to remember that.
This is New York, and tomorrow will be June third.
If all goes well, the following day will be the fourth.
But nothing is certain.
The hour had long since passed for his call to Virginia Stillman, and he debated whether to go through with it.
Would it be possible to ignore her?
Could he abandon everything now, just like that?
Yes, he said to himself, it was possible.
He could forget about the case, get back to his routine, write another book.
He could take a trip if he liked, even leave the country for a while.
He could go to Paris, for example.
Yes, that was possible.
But anywhere would do, he thought, anywhere at all.
He sat down in his living room and looked at the walls.
They had once been white, he remembered, but now they had turned a curious shade of yellow.
Perhaps one day they would drift further into dinginess, lasping into gray, or even brown, like some pieces of aging fruit.
A white wall becomes a yellow wall becomes a gray wall, he said to himself.
The paint becomes exhausted, the city encroaches with its soot, the plaster crumbles within.
Changes, then more changes still.
He smoked a cigarette, and then another, and then another.
He looked at his hands, saw that they were dirty, and got up to wash them.
In the bathroom, with the water running in the sink, he decided to shave as well.
He lathered his face, took out a clean blade, and started scraping off his beard.
For some reason, he found it unpleasant to look in the mirror and kept trying to avoid himself with his eyes.
You're getting old, he said to himself, you're turning into an old fart.
Then he went into the kitchen, ate a bowl of cornflakes, and smoked another cigarette.
It was seven o'clock now.
Once again, he debated whether to call Virginia Stillman.
As he turned the question over in his mind, it occurred to him that he no longer had an opinion.
He saw the argument for making the call, and at the same time he saw the argument for not making it.
In the end, it was etiquette that decided.
It would not be fair to disappear without telling her first.
After that, it would be perfectly acceptable.
As long as you tell people what you are going to do, he reasoned, it doesn't matter.
Then you are free to do what you want.
The number, however, was busy.
He waited five minutes and dialed again.
Again, the number was busy.
For the next hour Quinn alternated between dialing and waiting, always with the same result.
At last he called the operator and asked whether the phone was out of order.
There would be a charge of thirty cents, he was told.
Then came a crackling in the wires, the sound of further dialing, more voices.
Quinn tried to imagine what the operators looked like.
Then the first woman spoke again: the number was busy.
Quinn did not know what to think.
There were so many possibilities, he could not even begin.
Stillman? The phone off the hook? Someone else altogether?
He turned on the television and watched the first two innings of the Mets game.
Then he dialed once again.
Same thing.
In the top of the third St. Louis scored on a walk, a stolen base, an infield out, and a sacrifice fly.
The Mets matched that run in their half of the inning on a double by Wilson and a single by Youngblood.
Quinn realized that he didn't care.
A beer commercial came on, and he turned off the sound.
For the twentieth time the same thing happened.
In the top of the fourth St. Louis scored five runs, and Quinn turned off the picture as well.
He found his red notebook, sat down at his desk, and wrote steadily for the next two hours.
He did not bother to read over what he had written.
Then he called Virginia Stillman and got another busy signal.
He slammed the receiver down so hard that the plastic cracked.
When he tried to call again, he could no longer get a dial tone.
He stood up, went into the kitchen, and made another bowl of cornflakes.
Then he went to bed.
In his dream, which he later forgot, he found himself walking down Broadway, holding Auster's son by the hand.
Security measures are strict on flights to Israel, the bags are searched, the men are frisked, and the women have an electronic hoop passed over them, fore-and-aft.
Then hand luggage is opened.
No one is very patient.
Visibility in the queue is poor because of the many Hasidim with their broad hats and beards and sidelocks and dangling fringes who have descended on Heathrow and are far too restless to wait in line but rush in and out, gesticulating, exclaiming.
The corridors are jumping with them.
Some two hundred Hasidim are flying to Israel to attend the circumcision of the firstborn son of their spiritual leader, the Belzer Rabbi.
Entering the 747, my wife, Alexandra, and I are enfiladed by eyes that lie dark in hairy ambush.
To me there is nothing foreign in these hats, side-locks, and fringes.
It is my childhood revisited.
At the age of six, I myself wore a tallith katan, or scapular, under my shirt, only mine was a scrap of green calico print, whereas theirs are white linen.
God instructed Moses to speak to the children of Israel and to "bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments."
So they are still wearing them some four thousand years later.
We find our seats, two in a row of three, toward the rear of the aircraft.
"Do you speak Yiddish?" he says.
"Yes, certainly."
"I can not be next to your wife.
Please sit between us.
Be so good," he says.
"Of course."
I take the middle seat, which I dislike, but I am not really put out.
Curious, rather.
Our Hasid is in his late twenties.
He is pimply, his neck is thin, his blue eyes goggle, his underlip extrudes.
He does not keep a civilized face.
Thoughts and impulses other than civilized fill it by no means inferior impulses and thoughts.
And though he is not permitted to sit beside women unrelated to him or to look at them or to communicate with them in any manner (all of which probably saves him a great deal of trouble), he seems a good-hearted young man and he is visibly enjoying himself.
All the Hasidim are vividly enjoying themselves, dodging through the aisles, visiting chattering standing impatiently in the long lavatory lines, amiable, busy as geese.
They pay no attention to signs.
Don't they understand English?
The stewardesses are furious with them.
I ask one of the hostesses when I may expect to receive a drink and she cries out in irritation, "Back to your seat! "
She says this in so ringing a voice that I retreat.
Not so the merry-minded Hasidim, exulting everywhere.
The orders given by these young gentile uniformed females are nothing to them.
To them they are merely attendants, exotic bediener, all but bodyless.
Anticipating a difficulty, I ask the stewardess to serve me a kosher lunch.
"I can't do that, we haven't enough for them," she says.
"We weren't prepared."
Her big British eyes are affronted and her bosom has risen with indignation.
"We've got to go out of our way to Rome for more of their special meals."
Amused, my wife asks why I ordered the kosher lunch.
"Because when they bring my chicken dinner this kid with the beard will be in a state," I explain.
And so he is.
The British Airways chicken with the chill of death upon it lies before me.
But after three hours of security exercises at Heathrow I am hungry.
The young Hasid recoils when the tray is handed to me.
He addresses me again in Yiddish.
He says, "I must talk to you.
You won't be offended?"
"No, I don't think so."
"You may want to give me a slap in the face."
"Why should I?"
"You are a Jew.
You must be a Jew, we are speaking Yiddish.
How can you eat that! "
"It looks awful, doesn't it?"
"You mustn't touch it.
My womenfolk packed kosher-beef sandwiches for me.
Is your wife Jewish?"
Here I'm obliged to lie.
Alexandra is Rumanian.
But I can't give him too many shocks at once, and I say, "She has not had a Jewish upbringing."
"She doesn't speak Yiddish?"
"Not a word.
But excuse me, I want my lunch."
"Will you eat some of my kosher food instead, as a favor?"
"With pleasure."
"Then I will give you a sandwich, but only on one condition.
You must never never eat trephena food again."
"I can't promise you that.
You're asking too much.
And just for one sandwich."
"I have a duty toward you," he tells me.
"Will you listen to a proposition?"
"Of course I will."
"So let us make a deal.
I am prepared to pay you.
If you will eat nothing but kosher food, for the rest of your life I will send you fifteen dollars a week."
"That's very generous," I say.
"Well, you are a Jew," he says.
"I must try to save you."
"How do you earn your living?"
"In a Hasidic sweater factory in New Jersey.
We are all Hasidim there.
The boss is a Hasid.
I came from Israel five years ago to be married in New Jersey.
My rabbi is in Jerusalem."
"How is it that you don't know English?"
"What do I need English for?
So, I am asking, will you take my fifteen dollars?"
"Kosher food is far more expensive than other kinds," I say.
"Fifteen dollars isn't nearly enough."
"I can go as far as twenty-five."
"I can't accept such a sacrifice from you."
Shrugging, he gives up and I turn to the twice disagreeable chicken and eat guiltily, my appetite spoiled.
The young Hasid opens his prayer book.
"He's so fervent," says my wife.
"I wonder if he's praying for you."
She smiles at my discomfiture.
As soon as the trays are removed, the Hasidim block the aisles with their Minchah service, rocking themselves and stretching their necks upward.
This is what has held the Jews together for thousands of years.
"I like them," says my wife.
"They're so lively, so childlike."
"You might find them a little hard to live with," I tell her.
"You'd have to do everything their way, no options given."
"But they're cheerful, and they're warm and natural.
I love their costumes.
Couldn't you get one of those beautiful hats?"
"I don't know whether they sell them to outsiders."
When the Hasid returns to his seat after prayers, I tell him that my wife, a woman of learning, will be lecturing at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
"What is she?"
"A mathematician. "
He is puzzled.
"What is that?" he asks.
I try to explain.
He says, "This I never heard of.
What actually is it they do?"
I am astonished.
I knew that he was an innocent but I would never have believed him to be ignorant of such a thing.
"So you don't know what mathematicians are.
Le Monde gloated over this reversal.
On July 12, after the raid, Israel was accused of giving comfort to the reactionaries of Rhodesia and South Africa by its demonstration of military superiority and its use of Western arms and techniques, upsetting the balance between poor and rich countries, disturbing the work of men of good will in Paris who were trying to create a new climate and to treat the countries of the Third World as equals and partners.
Rhodesians and South Africans, said Le Monde, were toasting the Israelis in champagne.
But European approval of the raid would endanger the plans of France for a new international order.
On July 4-5, again before the rescue, Le Monde had reported without comment wisecracks made by Amin in a speech at Port Louis.
Addressing the OAS, Amin had provoked laughter and applause among the delegates by saying that the hostages were as comfortable as they could be in the circumstances surrounded by explosives.
"When I left," he said, laughing, "the hostages wept and begged me to stay. "
This broke everybody up.
We step into the street and my friend David Shahar, whose chest is large, takes a deep breath and advises me to do the same.
The air, the very air, is thought-nourishing in Jerusalem, the Sages themselves said so.
I am prepared to believe it.
I know that it must have special properties.
The delicacy of the light also affects me.
I look downward toward the Dead Sea, over broken rocks and small houses with bulbous roofs.
The color of these is that of the ground itself, and on this strange deadness the melting air presses with an almost human weight.
Something intelligible, something metaphysical is communicated by these colors.
The universe interprets itself before your eyes in the openness of the rockjumbled valley ending in dead water.
Elsewhere you die and disintegrate.
Here you die and mingle.
Shahar leads me down from the Mishkenot Sha'ananim, which stands on a slope and faces Mount Zion and the Old City, to the Gai-Hinnom (Gehenna of tradition), where worshipers of Moloch once sacrificed their children.
He leads me from the Gai-Hinnom up to an ancient Karaite burial ground, where you can see the mingling for yourself.
It acts queerly on my nerves (through the feet, as it were), because I feel that a good part of this dust must be ground out of human bone.
I don't know that Jerusalem is geologically older than other places but the dolomite and clay look hoarier than anything I ever saw.
Gray and sunken, in the thoughts of Mr Bloom in Joyce's Ulysses.
But there is nothing in the brilliant air and the massive white clouds hanging over the crumpled mountains that suggests exhaustion.
This atmosphere makes the American commonplace "out of this world" true enough to give your soul a start.
The municipality has turned the Gai-Hinnom into a park.
The Wolfson Foundation of London has paid for the planting of gardens, and Arab kids are kicking a soccer ball in the green bottom of the valley.
East Jerusalem toughies of fourteen are smoking cigarettes and stiffening their shoulders, practicing the dangerous-loiterer bit as we pass.
Shahar is bald, muscular, and his shirt is ornamented with nags, horseshoes, and bridles, a yellow print on dark blue.
Amusing, since he's a writer and a thoughtful man, anything but a tout.
So we look into ancient tombed caverns and the niches into which corpses once were laid.
Now truck fenders are rusting there, the twentieth century adding its crumbling metal to the great Jerusalem dust mixture.
You can be absolutely sure, says Shahar, that the Prophet Jeremiah passed this way.
Right where we are standing.
I find in Elie Kedourie's Arabic Political Memoirs facts unknown to most about American diplomacy in the late forties.
Certainly I didn't know them.
In the Middle East and probably elsewhere, the United States relied heavily on management consultants and public-relations experts.
The American firm of Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton lent one of its specialists, Miles Copeland by name, to the State Department, where he was in 1955 a member of a group called the Middle East Policy Planning Committee, the main purpose of which was, in his own words, "to work out ways of taking advantage of the friendship which was developing between ourselves and Nasser."
In 1947 Copeland had been sent to Damascus ("by whom is not stated," Kedourie says) "to make unofficial contact" with Syrian leaders and "to probe for means of persuading them, on their own, to liberalize their political system."
Spreading democracy over the world, the Americans first fought rigged elections in Syria, but the old corruption continued despite all their power and money could do.
Frustrated, the Americans decided for the best of reasons, as always, to make a heavier move:
"The American Minister at Damascus decided to encourage a military coup-d'etat, so that Syria might enjoy democracy," Kedourie writes.
This was not considered particularly bizarre; other American ambassadors and ministers in the Arab world were entirely in favor of "genuine" revolution to overthrow old landowners, rich crooks, and politicians.
"What was wanted was an elite to underpin the rulers, themselves in turn supported and buttressed by a population which presumably understood, approved, and legitimated the aims of such an elite.
Whoever knows the Middle East will agree that such a quest was the political equivalent of the search for the philosophical stone."
Failing in Syria, the Americans went to work in Egypt.
Kermit Roosevelt of the CIA "met a number of officers who were involved in the conspiracy which led to the coup-d'etat of 22 July, 1952."
The Americans wanted the new regime to make the populace literate, to create "a large and stable middle class a sufficient identification of local ideals and values, so that truly indigenous democratic institutions could grow up."
Gliding into a new political realm, the Americans arranged for loans to the Egyptian government.
They believed that genuine democracy was now on its way.
James Eichelberger, a State Department political scientist who had been an account executive for J Walter Thompson, one of the world's largest advertising and public-relations firms, "was sent to Cairo where he talked with Nasser and his confidants and produced a series of papers identifying the new government's problems and recommending policies to deal with them."
One of these papers, written by Eichelberger himself, was translated into Arabic, "commented upon by members of Nasser's staff, translated back into English for Eichelberger's benefit."
This document, called "Power Problems of a Revolutionary Government," went back-and-forth, according to Mr Copeland, "between English and Arabic until a final version was produced.
The final paper was passed off to the outside world as the work of Zakaria Mohieddin, Nasser's most thoughtful (in Western eyes), reasonable deputy, and accepted at face value by intelligence analysts of the State Department, the C.I.A. and, presumably, similar agencies of other governments."
Who would have thought that a former American account executive could write:
"The police should be politisized, and should become, to whatever extent necessary, a partisan paramilitary arm of the revolutionary government"?
This is Leninism, neat, with neither ice nor bitters.
Or, "The nerve center of the whole security system of a revolutionary state (or of any state) lies in a secret body, the identity and very existence of which can be safely known only to the head of the revolutionary government and to the fewest possible number of other key leaders."
It was Jefferson who said that the tree of liberty must occasionally be refreshed with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
We must now believe that the same romantic conviction has been alive somewhere in the offices of J Walter Thompson.
The United States is, after all, the prime revolutionary country.
Or was Mr Eichelberger simply an executive with a client to please and a job to do a pure professional?
Or is there in the world by now a natural understanding of revolution, of mass organization, cadres, police rule, and secret executive bodies?
This is a shocking suspicion.
Of course the paper written by Mr Eichelberger and his Egyptian collaborators states that the purpose of the Nasser seizure of power was "to solve the pressing social and political problems which made the revolution necessary."
To solve problems, to help, to befriend, to increase freedom.
To strengthen America's position, and at the same time to do good;
to advance the cause of universal equality;
to be the illusionless tough guy on a world scale;
to be a mover and shaker, a shaper of destiny or perhaps, surrendering to fantasies of omnipotence, to be the nation-making American plenipotentiary, at work behind the scenes and playing confidently even with Bolshevik fire.
And what problems were solved?
Nasser solved no problems.
Mr Kedourie doubts that he needed "to call on the resources of American political science for such lessons in tyranny?
What does remain most puzzling," he says, "is why it was thought that the imparting of such lessons could advance the interests of the United States, or even contribute to the welfare of the Egyptian people."
For an American, the most intriguing question is this:
Whence the passion for social theory among these high functionaries of the advertising world?
How did executive types ever learn of such things?
Reading The Sound and the Fury last night, I came upon words in Compson's thought that belonged to E E Cummings and the thirties, not to the year 1910.
"Land of the kike home of the wop," says Compson to himself when he buys a bun from a small Italian girl.
This I would have read without flinching in Chicago but in Jerusalem I flinched and put the book down.
Returning to it next day, I found Faulkner guilty of no offense.
It's possible that people at the turn of the century were saying "land of the kike" and that Faulkner didn't borrow it from Cummings.
I had been telling Shahar when we were walking in the Gai-Hinnom that I hadn't liked it when David Ben-Gurion on his visits to the United States would call upon American Jews to give up their illusions about goyish democracy and emigrate full speed to Israel.
As if America's two-hundred-year record of liberal democracy signified nothing.
If Israel were governed as Egypt is, or Syria, would I have come here at all?
But then, to its more severe leftist critics, some of them Jews, Israel is not the "democratic exception" it is said to be.
The New Left sees it as a reactionary small country.
Its detractors tell you how it abuses its Arab population and, to a lesser extent, Jewish immigrants from North Africa and the Orient.
It is occasionally denounced by some Israelis as corrupt, "Levantine," theocratic.
Gossip traces the worst of the Israeli financial swindles to the most observant of Orthodox Jews.
I am often told that the old Ashkenazi leaders were unimaginative, that the new Rabin group lacks stature, that Ben-Gurion was a terrible old guy but a true leader, that the younger generation is hostile to North African and Asian Jews.
These North African and Oriental immigrants are blamed for bringing a baksheesh mentality to Israel; the intellectuals are blamed for letting the quality of life (a deplorable phrase) deteriorate.
"We came here to build a just society.
And what happened immediately?"
I speak of this to Shahar.
He says to me, "Where there is no paradox there is no life."
In Jakov Lind's interesting brief book on Israel, Ben-Gurion is quoted as saying, "The Jews know hardly anything of a hell that might await them.
Their hell is a personal dissatisfaction with themselves if they are mediocre."
Jews do, it is well known, make inordinate demands upon themselves and upon one another.
Upon the world, too.
I occasionally wonder whether that is why the world is so uncomfortable with them.
At times I suspect that the world would be glad to see the last of its Christianity, and that it is the persistency of the Jews that prevents it.
I say this remembering that Jacques Maritain once characterized European anti-Semitism of the twentieth century as an attempt to get rid of the moral burden of Christianity.
And what is it that has led the Jews to place themselves, after the greatest disaster of their history, in a danger zone?
"Wouldn't it be the most horrible of ironies if the Jews had collected themselves conveniently in one country for a second Holocaust?"
This is a thought that sometimes crosses Jewish minds.
It is accompanied by the further reflection (partly proud, mostly bitter) that we Jews seem to have a genius for finding the heart of the crisis.
The Valley of Jehosaphat, with its tombs.
A narrow road, and on the slopes acres and acres of stone.
Caves, graves, litter, fallen rocks, and in tiny schoolrooms Arab boys singing their lessons.
Even in November the place is uncomfortably warm.
The Jordanians built a road over Jewish graves.
The municipality of Jerusalem is planning to build a new road and will tear the Jordanian one up.
The Herodian relics are all that relics should be columns distorted, well worked over by time, Absalom's tomb with its bulbous roof and odd funnel tapering out of it.
The armies of the dead in all directions, interminable.
A fine thing to obsess yourself with, burial and lamentation and lying about under the walls of Jerusalem waiting for the Messiah's trumpet to sound.
a few Arab hens are scratching up dust and pecking.
Not a breakfast egg comes to the table that isn't death-speckled.
Parties of American girls come down the slope in their dungarees, with sweaters tied by their sleeves about the waist.
Above, to the left, a Muslim cemetery.
Everything reflects the significant event, for the significant event is beyond question historical and political, not private.
She thinks that it is sly of me to deny this.
Not to submit to what societies and governments consider to be important.
Stendhal's heroes, when they are in prison, choose to think above love.
E E Cummings, locked up by the French government, finds his aesthetic paradise in the detention camp of Ferte Mace.
The bravest of modern writers are the Mandelstams and the Sinyavskys.
Before he died of cold, hunger, and exhaustion in Siberia, Osip Mandelstam recited his poems to other convicts, at their request.
Andrei Sinyavsky, in his prison journal, concentrates on art.
Perhaps to remain a poet in such circumstances is also to reach the heart of politics.
Then human feelings, human experience, the human form and face, recover their proper place the foreground.
My friend John Auerbach comes up from Caesarea to see me.
A kibbutznik seaman, he has just returned from a voyage.
I have known him for only a few years but he has become a dear friend.
I had been warned that as I grew older the difficulty of forming new friendships would be great.
On the contrary, I find it much easier now at sixty to draw near to people.
John looks too much the writer slight in person, delicate to be a chief engineer.
He does, however, hold an engineer's ticket and can do complicated emergency repairs in mid-ocean.
Boyish, bearded (the beard is short and copper-brown), nervous, a bit high, thinner than when I saw him last, he carries a cardboard valise containing books and booze and pyjamas and a house present.
He is delighted to be here, and he is suffering the one activates the other.
He is grieving for his son.
Adam Auerbach served in an electronic-warfare unit and was returning from a military action when the helicopter in which he was flying crashed.
We embrace and then we go out of doors with a bottle to have a drink and get some sun.
Even on a sunny morning the stone buildings of Jerusalem chill your hands and feet.
Stepping out, I feel a bit numb, like a wasp in autumn.
We sit on a stone wall over the garden and drink aquavit.
He wants to talk.
He loves books passionately, he wants to discuss American literature, to hear marvelous things from me.
But I can see that the big current of his suffering has begun to run heavily.
He has returned from a voyage, he is out in the sun shining from the hills of Moab, he is drinking aquavit with a dear friend, looking over at Mount Zion.
But his son is dead.
At sixteen John escaped from the Warsaw ghetto, leaving behind his parents and his sister.
They were killed.
Everyone was killed.
John somehow obtained Polish seaman's papers, and for several years he worked in the engine rooms of German freighters.
When the war ended he came to Israel via Cyprus, joined Kibbutz Sdot Yam, married, and had two children.
His first wife died of cancer about ten years ago and he has married again.
He says, "I ask myself in what ways my life has not been typical.
For a Jew from Eastern Europe it has been completely typical war, death of mother, death of father, death of sister, four years in disguise among the Germans, death of wife, death of son.
Thirty years of hard work, planting and harvesting in the kibbutz.
Nothing exceptional."
John sails infrequently now.
He doesn't like the new huge tankers.
Supermechanized, ultraefficient, they give the crew no time in foreign ports.
The cargo on the voyage from which he has just returned was Dead Sea potash.
They were to bring home Italian steel.
North of Naples they had bad weather and engine trouble, but they reached their harbor and anchored near two Japanese ships.
On the pilot's advice they were moved farther into port by two tugs.
Within five hours John had repaired the engines, but the port officials claimed that the ship was incapacitated and demanded that the captain post a twenty-thousand-dollar bond against expenses that might be run up by his "crippled ship."
True, the ship had had to be moved into its berth by the tugs but it had been crippled only briefly.
Well, this matter was in dispute.
The ship lay unloaded and demurrage fees mounted in brief, a holdup by local racketeers.
The same everywhere, now.
Everybody has some con going, says John, who loves American slang.
The home office in Haifa was trying to get protection from the insurance company.
There were long days in port with nothing to do.
The town was covered in potash dust.
Waiters and bartenders wiped dishes and glasses continually.
Brushing at dust was the commonest gesture in town.
A community of about twenty thousand people had traffic jams worthy of Rome, cars as a matter of course rushing into the reserved bus lanes, screwing everything up and honking madly.
It all came to a panting standstill morning and evening without fail.
To get away from the traffic snarl you could climb a nearby mountain and come down to a deserted beach, similar to the beach at Sdot Yam.
John and his dog, Mississippi, went there every day.
The German tourists had gone home, the bathing cabins were nailed shut.
It was lovely, the small waves coming in steadily.
In little pangs, said John.
Part of the American Sixth Fleet was anchored nearby.
The aircraft carrier John F Kennedy, with its helicopters, reminded John of the death of his son.
On shore leave they wear civilian clothing now.
This probably makes them less rowdy.
One of the boys was from Oklahoma, near Tulsa.
He had heard of Israel, but only just, and he was not especially interested.
John was delighted by this.
A clean young soul, he said.
Such ignorance was refreshing.
The young sailor knew nothing about holocausts or tanks in the desert or terrorist bombs.
Back at sea, John had to stand double watches in the engine room because he was shorthanded.
Off duty, he read in his cabin and chatted with his confidante, Mississippi.
The crew said he was drinking himself silly in his quarters.
When the ship passed Stromboli at night, there was a streak of crimson lava flowing from the volcano and the sailors wouldn't leave the television set to look at this natural phenomenon.
But an owl from the island, disturbed by the sparks, flew out to the ship and was discovered next day on the mast.
One of the young sailors carried it down.
Then an engine man from the Balkans said, "In our village we nailed owls to the church door when we caught them."
They shut the owl in the paint locker while they debated what to do with it, and in the night John set it free.
The bird scratched his arm rather badly.
"Go back to Stromboli, you dumb bastard," he said.
So it flew off and the ship continued on its foul way.
It's the water pumped into the tanks for ballast and then pumped out again that pollutes the seas, says John.
Before I left Chicago, the art critic Harold Rosenberg said to me, "Going to Jerusalem?
And wondering whether people will talk freely?
You've got to be kidding, they'll talk your head off."
He spoke as a Jew to a Jew about Jewish powers of speech.
In flight, if the door of your plane comes open you are sucked into space.
Here in Jerusalem, when you shut your apartment door behind you you fall into a gale of conversation exposition, argument, harangue, analysis, theory, expostulation, threat, and prophecy.
From diplomats you hear cagey explanations;
from responsible persons, cautious and grudging statements rephrasing and amending your own questions;
from parents and children, deadly divisions;
from friends who let themselves go, passionate speeches, raging denunciation of Western Europe, of Russia, of America.
I listen carefully, closely, more closely than I've ever listened in my life, utterly attentive, but I often feel that I have dropped into a shoreless sea.
The subject of all this talk is, ultimately, survival the survival of the decent society created in Israel within a few decades.
At first this is hard to grasp because the setting is so civilized.
You are in a city like many another well, not quite, for Jerusalem is the only ancient city I've ever seen whose antiquities are not on display as relics but are in daily use.
Still, the city is a modern city with modern utilities.
You shop in supermarkets, you say good morning to friends on the telephone, you hear symphony orchestras on the radio.
But suddenly the music stops and a terrorist bomb is reported.
A new explosion outside a coffee shop on the Jaffa Road: six young people killed and thirty-eight more wounded.
Uneasy, you go out to your civilized dinner.
Bombs are exploding everywhere.
Dynamite has just been thrown in London;
the difference is that when a bomb goes off in a West End restaurant the fundamental right of England to exist is not in dispute.
Yet here you sit at dinner with charming people in a dining room like any other.
You know that your hostess has lost a son; that her sister lost children in the 1973 war;
That in this Jerusalem street, coolly sweet with night flowers and dark green under the lamps, many other families have lost children.
And on the Jaffa Road, because of another bomb, six adolescents two on a break from night school stopping at a coffee shop to eat buns, have just died.
But in the domestic ceremony of passed dishes and filled glasses thoughts of a destructive enemy are hard to grasp.
What you do know is that there is one fact of Jewish life unchanged by the creation of a Jewish state: you can not take your right to live for granted.
Others can; you can not.
This is not to say that everyone else is living pleasantly and well under a decent regime.
No, it means only that the Jews, because they are Jews, have never been able to take the right to live as a natural right.
To be sure, many Israelis refuse to admit that this historic uneasiness has not been eliminated.
They seem to think of themselves as a fixed power, immovable.
Their point has been made.
The Nellie, a cruising yawl, swung to her anchor without a flutter of the sails, and was at rest.
The flood had made, the wind was nearly calm, and being bound down the river, the only thing for it was to come to and wait for the turn of the tide.
The sea-reach of the Thames stretched before us like the beginning of an interminable waterway.
In the offing the sea and the sky were welded together without a joint, and in the luminous space the tanned sails of the barges drifting up with the tide seemed to stand still in red clusters of canvas sharply peaked, with gleams of varnished sprits.
A haze rested on the low shores that ran out to sea in vanishing flatness.
The air was dark above Gravesend, and farther back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding motionless over the biggest, and the greatest, town on earth.
The Director of Companies was our captain and our host.
We four affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to seaward.
On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so nautical.
He resembled a pilot, which to a seaman is trustworthiness personified.
It was difficult to realize his work was not out there in the luminous estuary, but behind him, within the brooding gloom.
Between us there was, as I have already said somewhere, the bond of the sea.
Besides holding our hearts together through long periods of separation, it had the effect of making us tolerant of each other's yarns – and even convictions.
The Lawyer – the best of old fellows – had, because of his many years and many virtues, the only cushion on deck, and was lying on the only rug.
The Accountant had brought out already a box of dominoes, and was toying architecturally with the bones.
Marlow sat cross-legged right aft, leaning against the mizzen-mast.
He had sunken cheeks, a yellow complexion, a straight back, an ascetic aspect, and, with his arms dropped, the palms of hands outwards, resembled an idol.
The Director, satisfied the anchor had good hold, made his way aft and sat down amongst us.
We exchanged a few words lazily.
Afterwards there was silence on board the yacht.
For some reason or other we did not begin that game of dominoes.
We felt meditative, and fit for nothing but placid staring.
The day was ending in a serenity of still and exquisite brilliance.
The water shone pacifically; the sky, without a speck, was a benign immensity of unstained light; the very mist on the Essex marshes was like a gauzy and radiant fabric, hung from the wooded rises inland, and draping the low shores in diaphanous folds.
Only the gloom to the west, brooding over the upper reaches, became more somber every minute, as if angered by the approach of the sun.
And at last, in its curved and imperceptible fall, the sun sank low, and from glowing white changed to a dull red without rays and without heat, as if about to go out suddenly, stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men.
Forthwith a change came over the waters, and the serenity became less brilliant but more profound.
The old river in its broad reach rested unruffled at the decline of day, after ages of good service done to the race that peopled its banks, spread out in the tranquil dignity of a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth.
We looked at the venerable stream not in the vivid flush of a short day that comes and departs for ever, but in the august light of abiding memories.
And indeed nothing is easier for a man who has, as the phrase goes, followed the sea with reverence and affection, than to evoke the great spirit of the past upon the lower reaches of the Thames.
The tidal current runs to and fro in its unceasing service, crowded with memories of men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or to the battles of the sea.
It had known and served all the men of whom the nation is proud, from Sir Francis Drake to Sir John Franklin, knights all, titled and untitled – the great knights-errant of the sea.
It had borne all the ships whose names are like jewels flashing in the night of time, from the Golden Hind returning with her round flanks full of treasure, to be visited by the Queen's Highness and thus pass out of the gigantic tale, to the Erebus and Terror, bound on other conquests – and that never returned.
It had known the ships and the men.
They had sailed from Deptford, from Greenwich, from Erith – the adventurers and the settlers; kings' ships and the ships of men on Change; captains, admirals, the dark "interlopers" of the Eastern trade, and the commissioned "generals" of East India fleets.
Hunters for gold or pursuers of fame, they all had gone out on that stream, bearing the sword, and often the torch, messengers of the might within the land, bearers of a spark from the sacred fire.
What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery of an unknown earth!...
The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, the germs of empires.
The sun set; the dusk fell on the stream, and lights began to appear along the shore.
The Chapman lighthouse, a three-legged thing erect on a mud-flat, shone strongly.
Lights of ships moved in the fairway – a great stir of lights going up and going down. And farther west on the upper reaches the place of the monstrous town was still marked ominously on the sky, a brooding gloom in sunshine, a lurid glare under the stars.
And this also, said Marlow suddenly, has been one of the dark places of the earth.
He was the only man of us who still followed the sea.
The worst that could be said of him was that he did not represent his class.
He was a seaman, but he was a wanderer, too, while most seamen lead, if one may so express it, a sedentary life.
Their minds are of the stay-at-home order, and their home is always with them – the ship; and so is their country – the sea.
One ship is very much like another, and the sea is always the same.
In the immutability of their surroundings the foreign shores, the foreign faces, the changing immensity of life, glide past, veiled not by a sense of mystery but by a slightly disdainful ignorance; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be the sea itself, which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable as Destiny.
For the rest, after his hours of work, a casual stroll or a casual spree on shore suffices to unfold for him the secret of a whole continent, and generally he finds the secret not worth knowing.
The yarns of seamen have a direct simplicity, the whole meaning of which lies within the shell of a cracked nut.
But Marlow was not typical (if his propensity to spin yarns be excepted), and to him the meaning of an episode was not inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale which brought it out only as a glow brings out a haze, in the likeness of one of these misty halos that sometimes are made visible by the spectral illumination of moonshine.
His remark did not seem at all surprising.
It was just like Marlow. It was accepted in silence.
No one took the trouble to grunt even; and presently he said, very slow –
I was thinking of very old times, when the Romans first came here, nineteen hundred years ago – the other day....
Light came out of this river since – you say Knights?
Yes; but it is like a running blaze on a plain, like a flash of lightning in the clouds.
We live in the flicker – may it last as long as the old earth keeps rolling!
But darkness was here yesterday.
Imagine the feelings of a commander of a fine – what'd 'ye call 'em? – trireme in the Mediterranean, ordered suddenly to the north; run overland across the Gauls in a hurry; put in charge of one of these craft the legionaries, – a wonderful lot of handy men they must have been too – used to build, apparently by the hundred, in a month or two, if we may believe what we read.
Imagine him here – the very end of the world, a sea the color of lead, a sky the color of smoke, a kind of ship about as rigid as a concertina – and going up this river with stores, or orders, or what you like.
Sandbanks, marshes, forests, savages, – precious little to eat fit for a civilized man, nothing but Thames water to drink.
No Falernian wine here, no going ashore.
Here and there a military camp lost in a wilderness, like a needle in a bundle of hay – cold, fog, tempests, disease, exile, and death, – death skulking in the air, in the water, in the bush.
They must have been dying like flies here.
Oh yes – he did it.
Did it very well, too, no doubt, and without thinking much about it either, except afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in his time, perhaps.
They were men enough to face the darkness.
And perhaps he was cheered by keeping his eye on a chance of promotion to the fleet at Ravenna by-and-by, if he had good friends in Rome and survived the awful climate.
Or think of a decent young citizen in a toga – perhaps too much dice, you know – coming out here in the train of some prefect, or tax-gatherer, or trader even, to mend his fortunes.
Land in a swamp, march through the woods, and in some inland post feel the savagery, the utter savagery, had closed round him, – all that mysterious life of the wilderness that stirs in the forest, in the jungles, in the hearts of wild men.
There's no initiation either into such mysteries.
He has to live in the midst of the incomprehensible, which is also detestable.
And it has a fascination, too, that goes to work upon him.
The fascination of the abomination – you know.
Imagine the growing regrets, the longing to escape, the powerless disgust, the surrender, the hate.
He paused.
Mind, he began again, lifting one arm from the elbow, the palm of the hand outwards, so that, with his legs folded before him, he had the pose of a Buddha preaching in European clothes and without a lotus-flower – Mind, none of us would feel exactly like this.
What saves us is efficiency – the devotion to efficiency.
But these chaps were not much account, really.
They were no colonists; their administration was merely a squeeze, and nothing more, I suspect.
They were conquerors, and for that you want only brute force – nothing to boast of, when you have it, since your strength is just an accident arising from the weakness of others.
They grabbed what they could get for the sake of what was to be got.
It was just robbery with violence, aggravated murder on a great scale, and men going at it blind – as is very proper for those who tackle a darkness.
The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much.
What redeems it is the idea only.
An idea at the back of it; not a sentimental pretense but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea – something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice to....
He broke off.
Flames glided in the river, small green flames, red flames, white flames, pursuing, overtaking, joining, crossing each other – then separating slowly or hastily.
The traffic of the great city went on in the deepening night upon the sleepless river.
We looked on, waiting patiently – there was nothing else to do till the end of the flood; but it was only after a long silence, when he said, in a hesitating voice, I suppose you fellows remember I did once turn fresh-water sailor for a bit, that we knew we were fated, before the ebb began to run, to hear about one of Marlow's inconclusive experiences.
I don't want to bother you much with what happened to me personally he began, showing in this remark the weakness of many tellers of tales who seem so often unaware of what their audience would best like to hear;
yet to understand the effect of it on me you ought to know how I got out there, what I saw, how I went up that river to the place where I first met the poor chap.
It was the farthest point of navigation and the culminating point of my experience.
It seemed somehow to throw a kind of light on everything about me – and into my thoughts.
It was somber enough too – and pitiful – not extraordinary in any way – not very clear either.
No, not very clear.
And yet it seemed to throw a kind of light.
I had then, as you remember, just returned to London after a lot of Indian Ocean, Pacific, China Seas – a regular dose of the East – six years or so, and I was loafing about, hindering you fellows in your work and invading your homes, just as though I had got a heavenly mission to civilize you.
It was very fine for a time, but after a bit I did get tired of resting.
Then I began to look for a ship – I should think the hardest work on earth.
But the ships wouldn't even look at me.
And I got tired of that game too.
Now when I was a little chap I had a passion for maps.
I would look for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and lose myself in all the glories of exploration.
At that time there were many blank spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked particularly inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my finger on it and say, 'When I grow up I will go there.'
The North Pole was one of these places, I remember.
Well, I haven't been there yet, and shall not try now.
The glamour's off.
Other places were scattered about the Equator, and in every sort of latitude all over the two hemispheres.
I have been in some of them, and... well, we won't talk about that.
But there was one yet – the biggest, the most blank, so to speak – that I had a hankering after.
True, by this time it was not a blank space any more.
It had got filled since my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names.
It had ceased to be a blank space of delightful mystery – a white patch for a boy to dream gloriously over.
It had become a place of darkness.
But there was in it one river especially, a mighty big river, that you could see on the map, resembling an immense snake uncoiled, with its head in the sea, its body at rest curving afar over a vast country, and its tail lost in the depths of the land.
And as I looked at the map of it in a shop-window, it fascinated me as a snake would a bird – a silly little bird.
Then I remembered there was a big concern, a Company for trade on that river.
Dash it all! I thought to myself, they can't trade without using some kind of craft on that lot of fresh water – steamboats!
Why shouldn't I try to get charge of one?
I went on along Fleet Street, but could not shake off the idea.
The snake had charmed me.
You understand it was a Continental concern, that Trading society; but I have a lot of relations living on the Continent, because it's cheap and not so nasty as it looks, they say.
I ventured to hint that the Company was run for profit.
You forget, dear Charlie, that the laborer is worthy of his hire, she said, brightly.
It's queer how out of touch with truth women are.
They live in a world of their own, and there had never been anything like it, and never can be.
It is too beautiful altogether, and if they were to set it up it would go to pieces before the first sunset.
Some confounded fact we men have been living contentedly with ever since the day of creation would start up and knock the whole thing over.
After this I got embraced, told to wear flannel, be sure to write often, and so on – and I left.
In the street – I don't know why – a queer feeling came to me that I was an impostor.
Odd thing that I, who used to clear out for any part of the world at twenty-four hours' notice, with less thought than most men give to the crossing of a street, had a moment – I won't say of hesitation, but of startled pause, before this commonplace affair.
The best way I can explain it to you is by saying that, for a second or two, I felt as though, instead of going to the center of a continent, I were about to set off for the center of the earth.
I left in a French steamer, and she called in every blamed port they have out there, for, as far as I could see, the sole purpose of landing soldiers and custom-house officers.
I watched the coast.
Watching a coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma.
There it is before you – smiling, frowning, inviting, grand, mean, insipid, or savage, and always mute with an air of whispering,' Come and find out.
'This one was almost featureless, as if still in the making, with an aspect of monotonous grimness.
The edge of a colossal jungle, so dark-green as to be almost black, fringed with white surf, ran straight, like a ruled line, far, far away along a blue sea whose glitter was blurred by a creeping mist.
The sun was fierce, the land seemed to glisten and drip with steam.
Here and there grayish-whitish specks showed up, clustered inside the white surf, with a flag flying above them perhaps.
Settlements some centuries old, and still no bigger than pin-heads on the untouched expanse of their background.
We pounded along, stopped, landed soldiers; went on, landed custom-house clerks to levy toll in what looked like a God-forsaken wilderness, with a tin shed and a flag-pole lost in it; landed more soldiers – to take care of the custom-house clerks, presumably.
Some, I heard, got drowned in the surf; but whether they did or not, nobody seemed particularly to care.
They were just flung out there, and on we went.
Every day the coast looked the same, as though we had not moved; but we passed various places – trading places – with names like Gran' Bassam Little Popo, names that seemed to belong to some sordid farce acted in front of a sinister backcloth.
The idleness of a passenger, my isolation amongst all these men with whom I had no point of contact, the oily and languid sea, the uniform somberness of the coast, seemed to keep me away from the truth of things, within the toil of a mournful and senseless delusion.
The voice of the surf heard now and then was a positive pleasure, like the speech of a brother.
It was something natural, that had its reason, that had a meaning.
Now and then a boat from the shore gave one a momentary contact with reality.
It was paddled by black fellows.
You could see from afar the white of their eyeballs glistening.
They shouted, sang; their bodies streamed with perspiration; they had faces like grotesque masks – these chaps; but they had bone, muscle, a wild vitality, an intense energy of movement, that was as natural and true as the surf along their coast.
They wanted no excuse for being there. They were a great comfort to look at.
For a time I would feel I belonged still to a world of straightforward facts; but the feeling would not last long.
Something would turn up to scare it away.
Once, I remember, we came upon a man-of-war anchored off the coast.
There wasn't even a shed there, and she was shelling the bush.
It appears the French had one of their wars going on thereabouts.
Her ensign dropped limp like a rag; the muzzles of the long eight-inch guns stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, slimy swell swung her up lazily and let her down, swaying her thin masts.
In the empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent.
Pop, would go one of the eight-inch guns; a small flame would dart and vanish, a little white smoke would disappear, a tiny projectile would give a feeble screech – and nothing happened.
Nothing could happen.
There was a touch of insanity in the proceeding, a sense of lugubrious drollery in the sight; and it was not dissipated by somebody on board assuring me earnestly there was a camp of natives – he called them enemies! – hidden out of sight somewhere.
We gave her her letters (I heard the men in that lonely ship were dying of fever at the rate of three a day) and went on.
